## VR Training and the Medical Field

Virtual reality (VR) is defined as the use of computer technology to create a simulated environment. In recent years, the technology behind these artificial worlds has been advancing at a rapid pace to make them feel even more real and interactive. With said advancements, VR has gained many new practical applications, one of which is its use in training professionals. Most prominently, it is being used for training in the medical field. Especially with the coming of the recent COVID pandemic, virtual reality training has become a game-changer for the healthcare industry. So today, I would like to discuss the impact of virtual reality training in the medical field.

### What is VR Training?

First, it is important to understand what virtual reality training is. According to Pixo VR, “Virtual reality training is the digital simulation of lifelike scenarios for training purposes” (Pixo VR). The idea is for trainees to enter a 360°, active learning environment, experiencing sights and sounds that dissolve the barrier between virtual and actual reality. Using the headset and controllers, trainees look, speak, and move about freely in a 3D virtual setting, interacting with simulated real-world tools, machinery, and other trainees and instructors. This type of experience has become the new prominent simulation method for medical education.

### The benefits

So what are the benefits of training healthcare workers with virtual reality? First, it makes accessing clinical experiences simple. For a usual VR system, the only two things required are a headset and a laptop. Both of these are commercially available, making them easy to set up and safe for use. Because of this ease of accessibility, learners can largely go to a VR system by themselves and participate in a simulation whenever they want. This also frees up space and faculty time, as the intuitive software in the headset makes it largely able to be navigated alone by the student, in a relatively small environment compared to a traditional simulation (IN TEXT CITATION NEEDED). Also because of the commercial availability, there is no need for a high budget set up in order to have a meaningful training experience. 

Another benefit of virtual reality is that it is repeatable. Because of this, students can safely make mistakes, learn from them, and practice repeatedly to improve their performance. This is the hallmark of a successful simulation, and it can be done for a very reduced cost with fewer resources. According to Jack Pottle,”the cost of fully immersive [traditional] medical simulation approximates that for one learner to lead one simulation scenario costs over £200” (IN TEXT CITATION NEEDED). This doesn’t even include the initial cost of setting it up, and cost per year to upkeep. This can all total hundreds of thousands of dollars every year, whereas a high-end VR set up costs approximately £3,000 for a laptop and headset.  The software costs vary, but it is frequently under one-tenth of the cost of physical simulations. There are also practically no added upkeep costs, so overall there are substantial setup and running cost savings to be made with virtual reality.

### Does it work?

So that is great that it is a cost effective tool, and that it is good for easy to set up and repeatable simulation, but does it actually improve learning? According to a paper by the Nation Center for Biotechnology Information, they found that after collecting data from many other studies on the effectiveness of training with virtual reality, 95% of the studies have emphasized the improvement of the skills of trainees (IN TEXT CITATION NEEDED). They also reported that the studies they collected found that the students had, “a better understanding of the exterior and interior spatial relationship of the organs and development of the anatomical knowledge of students through the application of VR” (IN TEXT CITATION NEEDED). VR simulations have also been directly compared with traditional physical simulations. One study had 84 nurses randomized to either be trained with physical or virtual simulations and compared their results. They found that learning was the same in both, but the VR simulation had the advantage of being much cheaper. So it is evident that virtual reality is also an effective tool for actually improving the learning of students and is not just a simple cost-cutting solution.

### The negatives

Of course, virtual reality simulation isn’t always perfect, and can have a few drawbacks. Firstly, it is not the end-all and be-all solution for teaching and learning in the medical field. It is simply a tool that is integrated into existing curriculum, not a replacement. For instance, there is no need to have an immersive simulation for some procedures. Pottle states in his paper that it is not the best way to teach abdominal palpation, as only an accurate physical representation is really necessary to get the same results. It also isn’t needed to train in simpler tasks like cannulation. (IN TEXT CITATION NEEDED). Many other studies have also come to the same conclusion, that VR should be used as a complementary training along with main training and could never replace real environment training. One study on VR being used for the education of nurses emphasized, “guidance in the objectives of simulation training software and its combination with conventional trainings” (IN TEXT CITATION NEEDED). So although VR training is useful, it seems it has more to go before it could ever fully replace current training methods.

### The future

So where can VR training go from here? There are a lot of exciting things to look forward to when it comes to learning in virtual reality. With advancing technology, simulations can become even more realistic, with things like hand controls, voice communication, and haptics (the feeling of touch) becoming better and better over time. AI can be used to make interacting with virtual patients more lifelike, and can tailor custom experiences for learners. Another exciting feature becoming more of a possibility is multiplayer VR. Learners will be able to see and interact with each other, making remote simulations with people across the globe suddenly possible. People will be able to work on a simulated procedure with others, while receiving direct feedback from a doctor somewhere else in the world. The future for VR training is definitely something to look forward to.

### Conclusion

Overall, VR training is an exciting new field that has a lot of potential in not just the medical industry, but almost any industry that requires training. It is hard to say whether it could ever fully replace traditional training methods, but regardless, it remains a strong educational tool that will only improve over time. And because there is so much room for improvement, it is a field that I think anyone in CS could consider looking more into for a future career. 

## References

Those go here :)
